1 March June 26 the year 2000 preparing to interview dr. Green hot testing Just it will go This is June 26 now, so just say a sentence mail hi, okay
incidentally anything that we this is June 26 had the pleasure of chatting with dr. Mel Greenhut distinguished professor of economics we are sitting in the sixth floor of the Evans library looking out over a typical June day Mel as we begin would you describe your
growing up and your background and your experience before you came to A&M?
To introduce a reader or a listener to your experience.
You mean all the way back, starting from my early memories.
My dad was a part-time policeman during the Depression years and a part-time window washer.
Where?
In New York City.
And I mean, we were poor.
And he did everything.
And when I finally got off to college many years later, I was determined I didn't want to see that poverty that I had grown up in, and especially to have a father hanging out of big windows.
Actually, we lived out in Rosedale, New York, which is outside of the city, and on, I think it was my tenth birthday, my mother took me to New York City to celebrate my birthday.
And we're walking down a street, and there is my father hanging out of a window about the 15-story high.
My mother spotted him, ran away from me.
I ran after him.
What's wrong?
About four blocks down the way, she said, that was your father.
And I thought, I don't want to do that in my life.
Now I don't know if I want this recorded, but anyway, you asked me the background.
The result was I thought, gee whiz, these economists haven't done anything good, have they?
Maybe I could be an economist.
Well then I landed up in the Army, and when I got out of the Army I was on that wonderful GI Bill, and also I had graduated from college before.
Now what led you to Hofstra?
Why Hofstra?
Well, we lived out on the island, and I was only about 40 miles away in Hempstead.
So, and it was a nice liberal arts college.
I did want to go to Brown University.
Frankly, I was a cut-up in high school.
And Brown didn't want me.
I thought they made a big mistake.
In fact, I even started off at Purdue, one of the few schools I would take a young jerk.
And again, we don't want that word in there, but off the record, if you ask me personal, I would come back personally.
So anyway, when I got out of the Army, I decided, by gosh, I would become a do-gooder economist.
And I got married when I was in the Army.
And so after the war I got, went back to where my wife lived, which was Granite City, Illinois.
And I landed up at Washington University.
And took my doctorate there.
And we had a wonderful university there.
Arthur Holly Compton was the chancellor of the university.
One of the Compton boys, Carl and Arthur Holly.
They both got Nobel's in physics.
Fantastic people.
And how far should, now I'm already up to.
And then where'd you start your academic career?
At Auburn.
almost at Mizzou.
In fact, I had two offers.
One was at Mizzou and one was at Auburn.
And frankly, I liked Auburn.
It looked pretty good from my standpoint.
And so we went down there, my wife and I.
We had one youngster at that time, it's 1948 that I'm talking about now, one little girl, and another woman being born in St.
Louis.
My wife stayed behind.
We went down to orbit.
Now is that, well, what else back then?
And then where, from there to wherever you were when you came to A&M?
I learned early in the game, and I don't know if we want any of this recorded, that you have to have a PhD, Mel.
That was the department head.
And I had finished my residency at Washington U. I was unhappy about the pay and so forth.
And frankly, I apparently was a pretty good teacher, and he kept me employed in the summertime.
And by the time I got my doctorate, which was in fairly quick time, I got it by 1951,
The department head, who was a real neat man, Charles Hanson, said, gee, Mel, I'm going to disappoint you with pay, but we're putting you on tenure now.
He gave me a tiny pay boost and the dean just didn't have the money.
I said, well, I'll tell you now, Charles.
I'm happy to be on tenure, but I'm leaving as soon as I can.
Meanwhile, the Korean War broke out.
and I happen to be a military reservist.
And I'm also getting close now to finishing my... Oh, I'm backtracking.
This is before the doctorate, before I had finished it.
The Korean War had broken out, and I'm finishing my dissertation.
I'm within about six months and lo and behold I landed up coming from the university where I was teaching.
And again I ran out of context but I tried.
And I was opening the front door of my house and boy there's my wife standing there.
We had about three kids at this stage of the game.
I'm in 1950 in my memory bank.
And I'm roughly in the month of December, November of 1950.
My wife is standing there with two of our kids, if I recall correctly, and my wife is trembling and angry.
What's wrong, honey?
You didn't tell me you would call back in service.
Boy, if anyone started trembling, it was me.
What do you mean?
She shoved special orders at me.
Oh, my.
Boy, I looked at it, and sure enough, not only was I being recalled, I was being recalled to the same division I had been with many, many years before.
Oh, I mean, that was one of the most nerve-racking moments of my life.
I had a couple of experiences in my life that I would say were nerve-racking, and this one was possibly the worst because I had been working for the doctorate from actually 1940.
I got out in the end of 45, became a civilian, went on the GI Bill, and by 50, I've been working
double doing things.
I was on the GI Bill, I was tutoring on the side, I was a graduate assistant all through 46 to 48, finished all my residency with overloaded work and subsequent to that teaching at Auburn and at the same time at Auburn I was in
doing other things besides teaching, writing my dissertation and all of that stuff, and all of a sudden to go back in the service, and I was almost finished with the dissertation, and I thought, Lord Almighty, if I'm back in the Army for one year, two years, three years, by the time I go back to Washington University then with a dissertation, that will now be outdated, and also committee may have changed Army and everything I thought I had accomplished,
I'm going to start from scratch."
Meanwhile, Ted Williams, a fantastic baseball player, remember him?
That fellow might have established records that would still stand today if he hadn't spent three or four years in World War II, plus then in the Korean War.
Anyway, long story short, they had misdelivered, unbelievably, the
Pentagon or whoever was distributing these orders back then.
They had misdelivered something like 87, or not 87, 81 people in Alabama in reserve category, such as I was, had been ordered to different places, and they had failed to deliver those orders on time.
So what my wife was showing me, and it took me about 30 minutes of nerve-wracking searching and reading and thinking, Lord Almighty, I'm back in.
And my wife always knew I hated good vibes, so she actually technically thought I was going to sneak out of the house one day and be gone and say, honey, I'm sorry.
I couldn't help it.
I didn't want it, but they took me back.
It was a cancellation of order.
Oh, my.
And they had never delivered the original.
And incidentally, interestingly for the fact of stories, about a couple of weeks later, my wife and I went to Fort Benning, which was not far from Auburn.
And Auburn was basically one of those teetotaling towns, can we say?
No one teetotaled except
You didn't have any place in town there that you could really enjoy yourself, and now I'm celebrating.
I'm not in there.
Maybe I could finish that dissertation and get the degree.
We went to Fort Benning, and I'm sitting there, and some fellow came over to our table, my wife and I, and we chatted with him, and I mentioned that, boy, I'm happy not to be here with you.
I'm a civilian.
He said, well, I'm not happy to be here because I was a civilian as of a couple of months ago.
And they got me in, and then he topped my story in a sense.
He said, and just shows you the military can't get fouled up.
They sent him to some place in Florida.
He sold a business that he had.
I don't know what you call what business.
Maybe he was a dry cleaner or something.
He sold his business because he was going back in.
got off a train in Florida, looked around for a carrier, looked around for an MP, looked around for anyone.
There was no one that resembled anyone in the military.
And he had to check with the station master and he wired the AG in D.C.
and they had sent him to the wrong place.
So they sent him back home, and he awaited new orders, and this shows you how fouled up we were during the Korean War, and of course we know of many foul ups during World War II.
All right, so this is 1950, and you get your dissertation finished.
I finished it in about April of 51, and I got my doctorate, and actually in July I took my oral exam.
All right, now after Auburn, then where?
Then right after Auburn, because of my disappointment with the pay boost, and I thought I'm still eligible to be pulled back in the Korean War.
I didn't mind being in reserve.
I didn't mind being in World War II.
I didn't want to go back at this stage in my life unless there was a real conflict.
And frankly, a year and a half later,
The government changed, the military regulations were altered, and I was able to go in what was called standby reserve.
Not active, not ready, not anything like that, standby, which meant that there were no promotions, inline promotions, no pay, no summertime duty.
And no president could declare war and you go in service, only Congress.
And that was for all those of us who had served a certain amount of time in the military, which was wonderful.
And I know how I felt.
I felt sorry for Ted Williams to have to go in service again and end his baseball career to an extent.
And anyway, so meanwhile, backtracking, and this has been very incoherent,
because I'm jumping times and backtracking.
But anyway, I went to work for the government as price controller in Birmingham, Alabama.
I was chief economist because I wanted to leave Auburn.
I was unhappy that, by gosh, here's tenure.
You've got a lifetime job with us.
but we can't afford to pay you."
And that just sort of rankled me.
So the first crack out of the barrel, and as you know, as professors, we don't jump in the middle of the year typically to another faculty, and here was an opening at the Birmingham Office of Price Stabilization, chief economist, good payment than I was getting.
by far at Ormond, and I was just unhappy enough.
And by the way, Charles Hansen and I have stayed friends throughout our lives.
So anyway, I went to work in Birmingham, Alabama, OPS.
But I didn't like it, and I don't mind saying that there were graft opportunities.
That just rankled me.
I was trying to live a better life than
than that possible alternative.
So the first chance I had to go back into academia, which was about six, eight months later, I jumped at it and went to Mississippi State.
Unfortunately, Mississippi State, gosh, I'm saying things that, you know, I really don't think should be in print, but Mississippi State had
It was a nice university, but the people were teetotalers, except they really were not.
I learned how to drink martinis there and other things.
And any person who's leaving town, and this may indicate some sort of bigotry of all of us, but anyone who left town, especially if they've gone out of the state, please pick up XYZ bottles and so forth and so on.
And it was sort of farcical.
So I didn't, I must admit, I didn't.
I really liked the culture to that extent.
So after Mississippi State, we went to Rollins College.
I loved small academic colleges.
That was real good, but I started having great luck on publishing and had different universities, including Penn State and Dartmouth and others, starting to make overtures of real interest to me.
And stayed at Rollins.
I became director of the Division of Social Sciences, I think it was, and also ran the placement service on the side to make sure I had enough income because I had a budding family.
By that stage, we had four kids.
And I'm still hungry, mind you, and that was always a tip off with me.
I found that sometimes in academia the more you move the better off you are.
Even though my wife, almost every place we went to landed up as president of the Newcomers Club, president of the Women's Club on the campus.
She played at Auburn in the symphony and so forth.
So I forced that poor lady to move and move and move.
Rollins, a wonderful place.
We were doing real nice in many ways, but by gosh, Florida State beckoned, and I thought the offer there was pretty doggone good.
Also, at the time, I had other opportunities, such as North Carolina, which published my dissertation as a book.
But rather than go to North Carolina, we went to Florida State.
And what year was that?
That was in 1957.
Then at Florida State, oh, things were going real well for me, and Berkeley made an overture for a tenured professorship.
And I told my wife, well, I think we're going to leave.
And meanwhile, she's president of the Women's Club or something in Tallahassee.
And she got pretty upset over that one, and especially at Berkeley, raising four kids.
She didn't like the four-letter words that she had heard were being used by people around Berkeley at U of Cal.
So at that point,
An old friend of mine became dean at the U of Richmond, and he called me and said, I've got a wonderful setup for you.
Come as my associate dean and be the director of the evening division, and we'll give you 100 percent freedom ad infinitum.
I guess maybe in partial protest to my wife's refusal to consider Berkeley, I took her away from Florida State, though we both loved it, and we went to Richmond.
And I had wonderful years at Richmond, especially in consulting.
I lined up consulting for AT&T.
I got more money from them in one year as a consultant with them, because I was a consultant to an executive committee involving the presidents of, or vice presidents, chiefly rather, of the different Bell systems throughout the country.
Michigan Bell was one, and C&P of Virginia was on that thing.
Very lucrative, and besides that, being in proximity to D.C., I did some research with Amarad Research Corporation and others, and I was making the first really good money beyond that of a college professor.
My money at the University of Richmond was pretty darn good because I was associate dean of the day division and director of the evening division with other gratuities going.
But meanwhile, I was having a lot of good luck, academic success, another book or two, and several articles going out in top journals.
And Florida State kept saying, come on back, we miss you.
So I decided, oh, and then what happened?
The top of the thing, and Haskell, this is not to suggest anything against being presidents or what have you, universities of all things, but I decided I don't want to be an administrator, not really go full-time.
And they were severing the evening division from the School of Business, and they asked me if I would be the dean of the evening division, and they were giving it some sort of a name.
I don't even recall what.
I said, absolutely no.
I don't want to go full-time deaning.
I'm an academician.
I've got to do research.
So at that point, meanwhile, Florida State is saying, anytime you want to come back, come on back.
And at this point in my life, I thought, well, I had to become a dean now, and that means really changing my love, and my love was
economics and research.
So we went back to Florida State, and I had good luck.
A few years later, a fellow named Bill Wallace and another fellow, Bernie Sligar, you mentioned LSU.
Bill was a dean of the School of Business at LSU.
Bernie, I think, was at that time provost at LSU.
And they both wanted me to go to LSU.
And boy, they offered a nice deal for me, and I told my wife, Mari, this is around 1965 now, honey, I think we're going to leave Florida State again.
Well, we had just been back there for about three more years, and she had relocated herself in the community the way she liked it and wanted it.
And here I'm threatening to leave again."
Well, she said, well, if you're leaving, you're leaving me and the kids here.
And by this stage of the game, my oldest daughter now was almost ready for college, and she wanted to go to Florida State, which she subsequently did.
Anyway, so my wife stopped me on the LSU move.
LSU will come back when I talk about Irrewater.
Anyway, so I said no to Bernie, and Bernie, by the way, about four or five years later became president of Florida State University.
He left LSU.
And he was, by the way, an economist, and just a dandy person.
I've always been fond of him.
Bill Ross was a dandy fellow at LSU.
So I'm unhappy because
Well, I didn't want to go to LSU, and so here we are again at Florida State.
And I love Florida State, but as I indicated earlier, I didn't want the maximum dollar that I could get.
I mean, so often I'm getting opportunities and saying no, no, especially like northern universities.
I went, I don't know what year it was, I was at Michigan State, somewhere around the 65 period, and they wanted to hold on to me with a wonderful deal, and my wife was having apoplexy.
She never wanted to move, and I kept moving her.
And when that ties up with how I came here to A&M with the promise, I was like explaining them a little bit.
But in any event, so we don't go to LSU, we're still at Florida State, and Al Chalk, who I knew slightly, called me and said,
Would you want to come and give a few lectures here?
We'll pay you X, Y, Z and so forth."
Well okay, I don't mind lecturing.
It comes automatically.
I've been doing this for almost ten years now since I got out of the Army.
I could fall off out of a bed and give a lecture.
on what subject you want to borrow.
I mean, subject only economics, mind you.
So I came here and saw a lot of art.
What year was that?
This was in 1965, actually, when I gave some lectures over.
And some of this I'm going to mention, I don't know really.
You're going to have to be real careful on even what you give me to edit, because I'm telling you exactly what you asked me, what my life was like, and I'm telling you.
Anyway, so I gave a couple of lectures here and met the faculty, and the next thing I know is Al tells me that Earl Wetter doesn't like him, is unhappy with the Department of Economics.
The Department of Economics was, and you probably know much more than I'm going to be able to tell you, because you were here.
He said, the Department of Economics is loaded with these hotbed liberals, Earl Wetter,
And this is Al Chalk telling me this.
Well, I'm not popular with Al, but I think you would be the type of man that Earl Rudder would like to have and would back.
I said, oh well, I'm interested.
I'm sort of still fighting with my wife.
I didn't go to Berkeley once because of her.
I didn't go to Penn State, frankly, once because of her.
I didn't go to LSU because of her.
She's a wonderful lady, but by gosh, she keeps me at places, and after a while, I just find jobs getting better, and it depends on what this job will offer me, et cetera.
Well, to make a longer story, shorter but interesting, the next thing I knew is I was asked to come back to the campus to meet Earl Redder and to bring my wife.
And this was about how long after you gave the lectures?
This was about two months.
This was about January, maybe, in 1966.
And this one story coming up that I know you'll like, and I wouldn't mind seeing this in print.
I think Margaret Rudder might even enjoy it.
Ostensibly, again, giving a lecture or something, but basically to consider the job as department head and learn more about the university and the environments of Bryan College Station.
Frank Hewitt was then the dean of the College of Swiplash, you know, Haskell.
Anyway, Earl was out of town, if I recall, the first day when Ma and I were here.
And they had a party for us somewhere.
Maybe it was at Firecrest.
I don't recall.
Maybe it was down at the Marriott, was it?
Down here on Texas Avenue, umpteen years back with them.
We had a faculty club, too.
The Ramada?
Ramada.
That was it.
Anyway, but the next day, Earl was back, and he wanted to interview me, so Frank Hubert tells me.
And I learned, of course, from Al Chalk, that the reason Earl Redder did not particularly like Al was Al wanted to bring Willie Nelson to the campus.
And Earl therefore thought, well, by gosh, Willie Nelson, Al Chalk wants this fellow, and there were other fellows, John Tracy in the Department of Econ, remember John?
who used profanity quite a lot, even before profanity became the N-words via Hollywood of today.
I'm unhappy with Hollywood.
Anyway, Al Chalk was being victimized by association rather than what Al stood for.
If Earl Weather had ever really known Al Chalk, he would have never wanted to replace him.
Al was setting up a fine department in terms of teaching.
I think the rapport between the professors back then and the students was possibly at an optimal.
And Al knew it, and it was obvious from everything I could gather, that by gosh, teaching in this department is pretty outstanding, but they only had three PhDs or two, was it?
Al Chalk and Irv Linger.
Anyway, I was told by Al and then Frank Hubert, of course, who was doing much of the negotiating when Earl wasn't there, that they were better to back economics as far as a fellow could take it, because they were dreaming of great academic success in the university.
More particularly, the picture I was getting of Earl Rudder, and I knew of him because of his military accomplishments and my own interests and what have you.
I knew that this fellow, Earl Rudder, loved A&M, but he was unhappy with Al Chalk, but not for the right reason.
But he just wanted a great university and would really back anyone who wanted to do things.
Meanwhile, one of the graduates of A&M was a fellow named Larry Faureka.
Now, where does Larry Faureka come into this picture?
Well, Larry Faureka is an economist who wanted me to go to Penn State.
Many years before, Larry was a catalyst for my wanting to go to Penn State until my wife said, I don't want to go up to the north anymore.
I lived in Illinois.
I want to stay south.
And Earl would have thought the world of Larry, who is now Dean at Harvard.
And he'd grown up in Bryant.
And he had grown up in Bryant, as you say.
Yes, indeed.
And he was quite a golfer, by the way.
An excellent golfer.
Anyway, so Earl had contacted Larry because Al Chalk had said, the first man we want to bring in to be department head is this fellow.
and so apparently Earl had checked with Larry and Larry said, grab him, do anything he wants, which was the greatest break in the world.
I mean, I've had a life in which I've fallen into good things.
I could even use some military examples of how unbelievable things came out for me.
In retrospect, not the times, sometimes I was pretty unhappy about the way things were unfolding.
When you came for that interview visit, we'll call it.
This is going to be a precious one for you.
What kind of interviews did they have?
What did they ask you?
What did Mr. Rudder seem to be most concerned about?
Well, maybe I even beat him to the punch, frankly.
I'm sitting in front of him and right above him is LBJ, a big painting.
I understand we've got a problem right now on the campus with something of that kind.
I'll not go into details.
You could handle this as you will ask them.
And I must admit I'm unhappy about what I heard and I hope Herb Richardson, and I may land up calling him, he's an old friend of mine, and say, for heaven's sake, Herb, get that painting right back up on that wall.
Anyway, I'm looking at LBJ because, oh, I skipped, again, I go out of context.
The main reason I wanted to get out of Florida State, about a year or so, and perhaps prior to this, I'm not cognizant of the exact timing, but I think it was at Christmas, right after Al Chalk had had me here to give a seminar.
We're at a party in Tallahassee, and about five professors got me in the corner.
I wish Molly were here on this thing.
They had me in the corner of the room with the dean there, a fellow named Larry Chalmers.
You probably knew Larry Chalmers.
He became president at U of Kansas.